so why does good sex
so often fade even for couples who
continue to love each other as much as
ever
and why does good intimacy not guarantee
good sex contrary to popular belief
or the next question would be can we
want what we already have
that's the million dollar question right
and why is the forbidden so erotic what
is it about transgression that makes
desire so potent
and why do sex make babies and babies
spell erotic disaster in couples
it's kind of the fatal erotic blow isn't
it and when you love
how does it feel and when you desire how
is it different
these are some of the questions that are
at the center of my exploration
on the nature of erotic desire and its
concomitant dilemmas
in modern love so i travel the globe
and what i'm noticing is that everywhere
where romanticism has entered
there seems to be a crisis of desire
a crisis of desire as in
owning the wanting desire as an
expression of our individuality
of our free choice of our preferences of
our identity
desire that has become a central concept
as part of modern love and
individualistic societies
you know this is the first time in the
history of humankind
where we are trying to experience
sexuality in the long term
not because we want 14 children for
which
we need to have even more because many
of them won't make it
and not because it is exclusively a
woman's marital duty
this is the first time that we want sex
over time about pleasure and connection
that is rooted in desire so what
sustains desire and why is it so
difficult
and at the heart of sustaining desire
in a committed relationship i think is
the reconciliation
of two fundamental human needs
on the one hand our need for security
for predictability for safety
for dependability for reliability
for permanence all these anchoring
grounding experiences of our lives that
we call home
but we also have an equally strong need
men
and women for adventure for novelty
for mystery for risk for danger
for the unknown for the unexpected
surprise
you get the gist for journey for travel
so reconciling our need for security and
our need for adventure into one
relationship or what we today like to
call a passionate marriage
used to be a contradiction in terms
marriage was an economic
institution in which you were given a
partnership
for life in terms of children and social
status
and succession and companionship but now
we want our partner to still give us all
these things
but in addition i want you to be my best
friend and my trusted confidant and my
passionate lover to boot and we live
twice as long
so we come to one person and we
basically are
asking them to give us what once an
entire village used to provide
give me belonging give me identity give
me continuity but give me transcendence
and mystery and
all all in one give me comfort give me
edge give me novelty give me familiarity
give me predictability give me surprise
and we think it's a given and toys and
lingerie are gonna save us with that
so
so now we get to the existential reality
of this story right
because i think in some way
and i can i'll come back to that but the
crisis of desire is often a crisis of
the imagination so
why does good sex so often fade what is
the relationship between love and desire
how do they relate and how do they
conflict
because therein lies the mystery of
eroticism
so if there is a verb for me that comes
with love it's to have
and if there is a verb that comes with
desire it is to want
in love we want to have we want to know
the beloved
we want to minimize the distance we want
to contract
that gap we want to neutralize the
tensions
we want closeness but in desire
we tend to not really want to go back to
the places we've already gone
foregone conclusion does not keep our
interest
in desire we want an other somebody on
the other side that we can go visit
that we can go spend some time with that
we can go see what goes on in their red
light district
you know in desire we want a bridge to
cross
or in other words i sometimes say fire
needs air
desire needs a space and when it's said
like that it's often quite
abstract but then i took a question with
me and i've gone to more than 20
countries in the last few years with
mating in captivity
and i ask people when do you find
yourself most drawn to your partner
not attracted sexually per se but most
drawn
and across culture across religion and
across gender except for one
there are a few answers that just keep
coming back
so the first group is i am most drawn to
my partner
when she's away when we are apart
when we reunite basically
when i get back in touch with my ability
to imagine myself with my partner when
my imagination comes back in the picture
and when i can root it in absence and in
longing
which is a major component of desire but
then the second group
is even more interesting i am most drawn
to my partner
when i see him in the studio when she's
on stage
when he's in his element when she's
doing something she's passionate about
when i see him at the party and other
people are really drawn to him
when i see her hold court basically when
i look at my partner
radiant and confident probably the
biggest turn on across the board
radiant as in self-sustaining i look at
this person
by the way in desire people rarely talk
about it when we are blended into one
five centimeters from each other i don't
know any interest how much that is
but it's also not when the other person
is that far apart that you no longer see
them
it's when i'm looking at my partner from
a comfortable distance
where this person that is already so
familiar
so known is momentarily once again
somewhat mysterious
somewhat elusive and in this space
between me and the other
lies the erotic ellen lies that movement
toward the other
because sometimes as bruce says mystery
is not about traveling to new places but
it's about looking with new eyes
and so when i see my partner on his own
or her own
doing something in which they are
enveloped i look at this person
and i momentarily get a shift in
perception and i stay
open to the mysteries that are living
right next to me
and then more importantly in this
description
about the other or myself it's the same
what is most interesting is that there
is no neediness in desire
nobody needs anybody there is no
caretaking in desire caretaking is
mightily loving it's a powerful
anti-aphrodisiac
i have yet to see somebody who is so
turned on by somebody who needs them
wanting them is one thing needing them
is a shutdown and women have known that
forever because
anything that will bring up parenthood
will usually decrease the erotic charge
for good reasons right and then the
third group of answers usually would be
when i'm surprised when we laugh
together
um as somebody said to me in the office
today when he's in his talk so i said
you know it's either the talks or the
cowboy boots
you know it is a but basically it's when
you when there is novelty
but novelty isn't about new positions it
isn't a repertoire of techniques
novelty is what parts of you do you
bring out
what parts of you are just being seen
because
in some way one could say sex isn't
something you do huh
sex is a place you go it's a space you
enter
inside yourself and with another or
others
so where do you go in sex what parts of
you do you connect
to what do you seek to express there is
it a place
for transcendence and spiritual union is
it a place for
naughtiness and is it a place to be
safely aggressive is it a place where
you can finally surrender and not
have to take responsibility for
everything is it a place where you can
express your
infantile wishes what comes out there
it's a language
it isn't just a behavior and it's a
poetic of that language that i'm
interested in which is why i began to
explore this concept of erotic
intelligence
you know animals have sex it's the pivot
it's biology it's the natural instinct
we are the only ones who have an erotic
life
which means that it's sexuality
transformed by the human imagination we
are the only ones who can make love
for hours have a blissful time multiple
orgasms and touch nobody just because we
can imagine it
we can hint at it we don't even have to
do it we can experience that
powerful thing called anticipation which
is a mortar to desire
the ability to imagine it as if it's
happening
to experience it as if it's happening
while nothing is happening
and everything is happening at the same
time so
when i began to think about eroticism i
began to think about the poetics of sex
and and if i look at it as an
intelligence then it's something that
you cultivate
what are the ingredients imagination
playfulness novelty curiosity
mystery but the central agent is really
that
that piece called the imagination but
more importantly
for me to begin to understand who are
the couples who have an erotic spark
what sustains desire i had to go back to
the original definition of
eroticism the mystical definition and i
went through it through a bifurcation by
looking actually a trauma
which is the other side and i looked at
it at looking at the community that i
had grown up in which was a community in
belgium
all holocaust survivors and in my
community there were two groups
those who didn't die and those who came
back to life
and those who didn't die lived often
very tethered to the ground
could not experience pleasure could not
trust
because when you're vigilant worried
anxious and insecure
you can't lift your head to go and take
off in space and be playful and safe
and imaginative those who came back to
life were those who understood the
erotic as an antidote to death
they knew how to keep themselves alive
and when i began to listen to the
sexlessness of the couples that i work
with
i sometimes would hear people say i want
more sex
but generally people want better sex and
better is to reconnect with that quality
of aliveness of vibrancy of renewal of
vitality
of eros of energy that sex used to
afford them or that they've hoped it
would afford
them and so i began to ask a different
question
i shut myself off when began to be the
i turn off my desires when which is not
the same question as what turns me off
is
and you turn me off when and people
began to say i
turn myself off when i feel dead inside
when i don't like my body
when i feel old when i haven't had time
for myself when i haven't had a chance
to even check in with you
when i don't perform when i work when i
feel low self-esteem when i don't have a
sense of self-worth
when i don't feel like i have a right to
want to take
to receive pleasure and then i began to
ask the reverse question i turn myself
on when because most of the time people
like to ask the question
you turn me on what turns me on and i'm
out of the question
you know now if you are dead inside the
other person can do a lot of things for
valentine it won't make a dent there is
nobody at the reception desk
you know so i turn myself on when i turn
my desires i
wake up when you know now
in this paradox between love and desire
what seems to be so
puzzling is that the very ingredients
that nurture
love mutuality reciprocity protection
worry responsibility for the other are
sometimes the very ingredients that
stifle desire
because desire comes with a host of
feelings that are not always so
um favorites of love jealousy
possessiveness
aggression power dominance naughtiness
mischief basically most of us you know
will get turned on at night by the very
same things that we will demonstrate
against during the day
you know the erotic mind is not very
politically correct
if everybody was fantasizing on a bed of
roses we wouldn't be having such
interesting talks about this
you know but no in our mind up there
are a host of things going on that we
don't always know how to bring to the
person that we love because
we think love comes with selflessness
and in fact desire comes with a certain
amount of selfishness in the best sense
of the word
the ability to stay connected to oneself
in the presence of another
so i want to draw that little image for
you because
this need to reconcile these two sets of
needs
we are born with that our need for
connection our need for separateness or
our need for security and adventure
or a need for togetherness and for
autonomy and if you think about the
little kid who sits on your lap
and who is cozily nested here and very
secure and comfortable and at some
point all of us need to go out into the
world
to discover and to explore that's the
beginning of desire
that next exploratory needs curiosity
discovery and then at some point they
turn around and they look at you
and if you tell them hey kiddo the
world's a great place go for it there's
so much fun out there
then they can turn away and they can
experience connection and separateness
at the same time they can go off in
their imagination
off in their body off in their
playfulness
all the while knowing that there's
somebody when they come back to
but if on this side there is somebody
who says i'm worried
i'm anxious i'm depressed my partner
hasn't taken care of me in so long
what's so good out there don't we have
everything you need
together you and i then there are a few
little reactions that
all of us can pretty much recognize
some of us will come back came back a
long time ago
and that little child who comes back is
the child who will forego a part of
himself
in order not to lose the other i will
lose my freedom
in order not to lose connection and i
will learn to love in a certain way
that will become burdened with extra
worry and
extra responsibility and extra
protection
and i won't know how to leave you in
order
to go play in order to go experience
pleasure
in order to discover to enter inside
myself
translate this into adult language it
starts very young
it continues into our sex lives up to
the end
child number two comes back but looks
like that over their shoulder all the
time
you know are you gonna be there you're
gonna curse me you're gonna scold me
you're gonna be angry with me
and they may be gone but they're never
really away and those are often the
people that will tell you in the
beginning it was super hot
because in the beginning the growing
intimacy wasn't yet
so strong that it actually led to the
decrease of desire
the more connected i became the more
responsible i felt
the less i was able to let go in your
presence
the third child doesn't really come back
so what happens if you want to sustain
desire
it's that real dialectic piece on the
one hand you want the security in order
to be able to go
on the other hand if you can't go you
can't have pleasure
you can't culminate you don't have an
orgasm you don't get excited because you
spend your
time in the body and the head of the
other and not in your own
so in this dilemma about reconciling
these two sets of fundamental needs
there are a few things that i've come to
understand erotic couples do
one they have a lot of sexual privacy
they understand that there is an erotic
space that belongs to each of them
they also understand that foreplay is
not something you do five minutes before
the real thing
foreplay pretty much starts at the end
of the previous orgasm
they also understand that an erotic
space
isn't about you begin to stroke the
other it's about to create a space where
you leave management inc
maybe where you leave the agile program
and you actually
just are enter that place where you stop
being the good citizen who is taking
care of things and being responsible
responsibility and desire just bad
heads they don't really do well together
erotic couples also understand that
passion waxes and wanes
it's pretty much like the moon it has
intermittent eclipses
but what they know is they know how to
resurrect it they know how to bring it
back
and they know how to bring it back
because they have demystified one big
myth
which is the myth of spontaneity which
is that it's just going to fall from
heaven while you're folding the laundry
like a deus ex macula
and in fact they understood that
whatever going is going to just happen
in a long-term relationship
already has committed sex is
premeditated sex
it's willful it's intentional
it's focus and presence mary valentine